And then in this lecture, I'm going to
give a little overview
and a very brief history of the R
statistical programing environment.
So the very first question, I think is
most obvious, is which is, what is R?
And the answer is actually quite simple.
It's basically R is a dialect of S.
Okay, so that leads to the next logical
question, which is what is S?
So S was a language, or is a language that
was developed by John Chambers and
at the now-defunct Bell Labs.
And it was initiated in 1976
as an internal statistical analysis
environment, so
the, an environment that people at Bell
Labs could use to analyze data.
And initially it was implemented as a
series of
FORTRAN libraries to kind of implement
routines that were
tedious to have to do over and over again,
so there were FORTRAN libraries to repeat
these statistical routines.
Early versions of the language did
not contain functions for statistical
modelling.
That did not come until roughly version
three of the language.
So in 1988, the system was rewritten in
the C language and to make it
more portable across systems and it began
to resemble the system that we have today.
So this was version three.
And there was a seminal book the, called
the Statistical
Models in S written by John Chambers and
Trevor Hastie.
Sometimes referred to as the white book.
And that documents,
all the statistical analysis functionality
that came
into the version, that version of the
language.
Version four of the S language was
released in 1998.
And its version, it's the version we more
or less use today.
The book Programming with Data, which is a
reference for this course, is written by
John Chambers sometimes called the green
book and
it documents version four of the S
language.
So, R is an implementation of the S
language,
that was originally del, developed in Bell
Labs.
So, just a little bit more history here,
in 1993 Bell Labs gave a corporation
called StatSci which became Insightful
Corporation, an exclusive
license to develop and sell the S
language.
In 2004, Insightful purchased the S
language completely from Lucent.
So Bell Labs became Lucent Technology for
$2 million, and became the current owner.
In 2006, Alcatel purchased Lucent
Technologies and it's now called
Alcatel-Lucent.
So Insightful developed a product which
was a implementation
of the S language under the product name
S-PLUS.
And they built a number of fancy features
into it for
example graphical user interfaces and all
kinds of a nice tools.
that, so that's where the plus comes from
in S-PLUS.
In 2008 the Insightful Corporation
was acquired a company called TIBCO for
$25 million
dollars and that's more or less where it
stands.
TIBCO still develops as PLUS, although in
a
variety of different types of business
analytic type products.
And it continues to this day.
So you can see the history of the language
is a little bit
tortured because of the various corporate
acquisitions
but it still survives to this day.
The basic fundamentals of the S language
have
not really changed since 1998 and the
language that existed in 1998 looks
more or less like we, like what we use
today at least superficially.
And it's worth nothing that in 1998 the S
language won the association for repeating
machinery software system award.
A very pretigious honor.
So in a document called the stages and the
evolution of S, John
Chambers who was the original writer of
the S language the, the original creator
kind of laid out his key principal with
designing the S language.
And it's very important I think to to see
this which is that basically.
They wanted to create an interactive
environment where you
didn't have to think of themselves as
programming, right.
Then he says then as the needs became
clearer and their sophistication
increased, they should be
able to slide gradually into programming,
when the
language and system aspects would become
more important.
So the basic idea is behind the S language
and
then later the R language is that people
would enter the language in an interactive
environment.
Where they could use the lang, the
environment, without knowing about any
sort of programming, or having to know
very detailed aspects of the language.
So, they could use the environment to look
at data, and do basic analyses.
And then when the environment, when they
kind of
outgrew their environment, then they can
get into programming.
They could get into learning the language
aspects and
learning to develop their own tools and,
and the system would very
kind of, would promote the kind of
transition from user to programmer.
And so that was the basic philosopy of the
S language.
So that's enough about S.
we, let's go back to R.
So what is R about?
So basically, R is a relatively recent
development.
In 1991, it was created in New Zealand by
two gentleman named Ross Ihaka and
Robert Gentleman.
So, and they talked about their experience
developing R in a paper
writ-, published in 1996 in the Journal of
Computation and Graphical Statistics.
In 1993 the first announcement of R was
made to the public.
1995, Martin Michler convinced Ross and
Robert to use,
to license R under the GNU General Public
License.
And we'll talk a little bit about, more
about that in a second.
And that made R what
we call free software.
1996 a mailing list was developed, so
there's two main mailing lists.
One called R-help, which is a general
mailing list for questions.
And R-devel, which is a more specific
mailing list
for people who are doing development work
in R.
1997, what's called the R core group was
formed.
And these contained a lot of, this
contained a lot of the same people.
From the S-PLUS who developed S-PLUS.
And the core group, basically controls the
source code for R.
So this, so the primary source code for R.
Can only be modified by members of the R
core group.
However, a number of, people who are not
in the core group have
suggested changes to R, and they have been
accepted by the core group.
So, some of the features of R the first
one, which was important
back in the old days, when people were
still using S+ but the
syntax is very similar to S, which made it
easy for S+ users to switch over.
This feature isn't quite so relevant
today,
where most people generally go to R
directly.
The semantics are superficially similar to
S, in that it looks like it's S, but
in reality are quite different, but we'll
talk more about this in the future
lecture.
One of the main benefits of R is that
it runs on any standard computing platform
or operating system.
Mac, Windows, Linux whatever you
want even on your PlayStation 3 and there
are frequent releases, so there
are annual major releases and often there
are bug fixes releases in between.
There is a very active development going
on and so things are happening.
The software the core software of R is
actually quite lean.
Its functionality is divided into modular
packages, so you don't
have to download and install a massive
piece of software.
Whereas you can download
a very small piece of fundamental core,
kind of
functions, and then add things on as you
need them.
So it's graphics capabilities are very
sophisticated and
give the user a lot of control over
how graphics are, are, are created, and in
my opinion are better than most stat
packages.
It might even be the best for the mo- kind
of a general purpose statistical package.
It's very useful for interactive work as I
said before, but it contains this powerful
programming language.
For developing new tools,
so, it eases the transition from the user
to the program.
And fundamentally, actually, for a
language like this, is
that there is a very active and vibrant
user community.
So the mailing lists at R-help and R-devel
are very active.
There's many, posts per day, and there's
also a
series on stack overflow where questions
can be answered.
So, the user community is, is one of the
most interesting aspects of R.
It's where all the R packages come from
and it creates a lot
of kind of interesting features.
Of course one of the, probably the most
critical feature of R is that it's free.
Both in the sense of free beer and the
sense of speech.
So what I mean by that, is that it doesn't
cost any
money so you can download the entire
software from from the web.
And also it's free software, so I'm
going to divert for
a second to talk a little bit about free
software.
So, with free software there are four
basic principles, right?
You have four basic freedoms that you
have.
The freedom
zero is the freedom to run the program for
any purpose, so you don't need.
There's no restrictions on how you can run
the program or when you
can run the program or what you can or
cannot do with it.
Freedom one is the freedom to study how
the program works and adapt it to your
needs.
So this happens almost every day which is
that
you can look at the source code for R
itself.
You can make changes to it if you want.
You can, you may improve it or make a
better version
of it.
You can sell changes to it if you want.
You can do, you can modify the program any
way you want and adapt it to your needs.
Of course, so you can look at the source
code for this to get freedom one.
Freedom two is that you have the freedom
to redistribute copies so you can help
your neighbor and so the idea is that you
can give copies to other people.
You can sell copies.
You can do whatever you want with it.
Lastly you have the freedom to improve the
program and release your improvements
to the public so the whole community
benefits, so this is freedom three.
The idea is that when people make changes
to the program they
can release them to the public so that
everyone gets those changes.
And so these basic freedoms are outlined
by the free software
foundation and you can see more about it
at their website there.
So, there a couple drawbacks of R.
I won't go through all of them
and probably other people have many other
complaints.
But there's some basic drawbacks which are
one
that it's essentially based on 40 year old
technology.
So the original S language developed in
the 70s was based on
a couple of principles, and the basic
ideas have not changed too much.
Since then and so as, one of the results
of that for example
is that there is little built in support
for dynamic or 3D graphics.
But things have improved, greatly and not
on that front since the old days
and there's a lot of interesting tools now
packages for doing dynamic or 3D graphics.
Another drawback of R that I, I hear a lot
about is
that the functionality is based on
consumer demand and basically user
contributions.
So if no one feels like implementing your
favorite message then that's your job to
do.
And so you can't, there is no corporation,
there's no company that you can complain
to.
There's no helpline that you can call to
say
that, to demand a specific implementation
or a specific feature.
If the feature's not there, then you have
to build it.
Or at least
you can pay someone to build it.
Another drawback which is a little bit
more technical is that the objects that
you manipulate in R have to be stored in
the physical memory of the computer.
And so if the object is bigger, than the
physical
memory of the computer, then you can't
load it into memory.
And then therefore you can't do something
in R with that object.
So there have been a lot of advancements
to deal with this too.
Both in the R language and also
just in the hardware side there are
computers now
that you can buy with tremendous amounts
of memory.
And so some of those problems had been
resolved just by, kind of, improvements in
technology.
But nevertheless, as we enter the, kind
of, big data era where you have larger
and larger data sets, the model of
loading
objects into physical memory can be a
limitation.
And finally, I'll just say that R is not
ideal for all possible situations.
And so many people,
I think, in ways is a good thing they have
high expectations for R.
They expect it to be able to do
everything.
But it doesn't do everything and so you
should go into this knowing that fact.
So the basic R system is divided into
two, what you can think as two conceptual
parts.
There is the base R system that you
download
from a CRAN which is the comprehensive R
archive network.
And that's kind of the go to place for all
things R.
Then there's kind of everything else.
And so the base system contains what's
called the base package which has all
the kind of low level fundamental
functions
that you need to run the R system.
And then there are other packages
contained in the
base system which includes for example
util stats, data sets,
graphics and a bunch of other packages
that are kind
of fundamental packages that more or less
everyone might use.
And then there are a series
of recommended packages, so, boot for
bootstrap, class for
classification, cluster, codetools,
foreign, and a variety of other packages.
These are the commonly used packages, they
may not
be critical packages, but they're commonly
used by many people.
So all of these packages come with this,
the base R system that you download from
CRAN.
Now, but there's much more than this
obviously,
and on the, on CRAN, there are, right now
there are about 4,000 packages that have
been
developed by users and programmers all
around the world.
These packages are user contributed.
They're not controlled by the R core.
And they are uploaded to CRAN on a
everyday on a periodic basis.
And the i-, and CRAN has a few, has a
number of restrictions and standards that
have to be met in
order to get a package on to CRAN.
So, one of the nice things about CRAN is
that there, that
the packages that you download have to
meet a certain level of quality.
And so there have to be, for example there
has
to be documentation for all the functions
that are in
the package, and there has to be and they
have
to make sure that they pass a certain
number of tests.
So, so CRAN has, has a lot of different
packages
written by users and the number is really
increasing everyday.
So it's
very exciting to see all these packages on
CRAN
and there, and to see new ones come up
everyday.
There are also packages associated with
the Bioconductor
project, which is a packaged, which is a
project designed to implement R software
for, kind
of, genomic and, kind of, bio, biological
data analysis.
and, of course, there are also all their
packages
made that people make available on their
personal websites.
And there's really no
reliable way to keep track of how many
packages are available in this fashion.
So, there's really thousands of packages
out there written by people.
That you can discover and use, to analyze
data.
So there are a couple of documents that
you can find on the R website.
As you're learning to use R, you then
want to flip through some of these.
One is an introduction to R, which is a
relatively long PDF
document now that kind of goes through the
basics of how to use R,
how to use the language.
There's the Writing R Extensions manual
which is really only
useful to read if you're thinking of
developing R packages.
Which are these R extensions to the main
system.
The R data import and export manual, which
is useful
for getting R's data into R and the
various different ways.
The R installation administration manual
is, is most useful if you want to
build R from the source code, and I'll
talk about that in another video.
And then the R internals manual.
Is is a really technical document for how
R is designed.
How R is implemented at a very low level.
And it's not really for the faint of
heart.
But if you're that kind of person, who
wants to know how R
works at a very, very low level, this is
the document for you.
So, I'm just going to end over here with a
couple of texts
that are kind of standard or kind of
classic texts in this area.
Of course
the books by John Chambers offers data
analysis
and programming the data are both
published by Springer.
And then there's two books by Bill
Venables and Brian Ripley.
One is called Modern Applied Statistics
with
S, and another one's called S Programing.
Although they have the, the, they talk
about S in the title,
these books are all, are both very
relevant for R programming too.
There's a book by Pinheiroand Base, which
is Mixed Effects, Models in S and S-PLUS.
That's also
quite useful, for R programmers too.
And finally Paul Murrell who designed the
R graphic system has written a
book called R Graphics and actually it's
currently in its second edition right now.
So, a couple other resources, one is that
Springer, the publisher Springer has a
series of books
called Use R, which is, which is a, a lot
of very, kind of relatively short books.
How to use R for different types of
topics, different application areas.
This is quite a nice
series of books that you may be interested
in.
And there may be a book written for you
particular area of application.
And there's a longer list of books on the
R website.
So, that was a brief overview of R, and
the history of how it kind of came to be.
and, starting with the next video, I'll
start talking about the details of
the R programming language, and how we can
use it to analyze data.